OSDOCS-13326: add management succession procedure (#93327)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/nw-ingress-gateway-api-manage-succession.adoc

// Modules included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/configuring_ingress_cluster_traffic/ingress-gateway-api.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-ingress-gateway-api-manage-succession_{context}"]
= Preparing for Gateway API management succession by the Ingress Operator

> In {product-title} {product-version}, the Ingress Operator manages the lifecycle of any Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). Upgrading from a previous version of {product-title} where this management was not present requires you to make changes or remove any Gateway API CRDs that already exist in the cluster so that they conform to the specific {product-title} specification required by the Ingress Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting in {product-title} 4.19, the Ingress Operator manages the lifecycle of any Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). Upgrading from a version prior to 4.19 of {product-title} where this management was not present requires you to replace or remove any Gateway API CRDs that already exist in the cluster so that they conform to the specific {product-title} specification required by the Ingress Operator.  {product-title} version 4.19 requires Gateway API Standard v1.2.0 CRDs.
```

[WARNING]
====
Updating or deleting Gateway API resources can result in downtime and loss of service or data. Be sure you understand how this will affect your cluster before performing the steps in this procedure.
====

.Prerequisites
. Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`)
. You have access to an {product-title} account with cluster administrator access.

.Procedure

> * If you want to delete the Gateway API CRDs, run the following command:

Author: @Thealisyed do you mean with an `oc get` command? im not sure, would that be helpful for the user here?

+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc delete crd gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io

Reviewer 2: 5 gateways...
```
gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io                          2025-05-26T18:44:21Z
gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io                                2025-05-26T18:44:21Z
grpcroutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io                              2025-05-26T18:44:22Z
httproutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io                              2025-05-26T18:44:22Z
referencegrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io 
```

> $ oc delete crd gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io

Reviewer: There could be any number of Gateway API CRDs to delete, so you were on the right track with using `oc get`:

# This will show all Gateway API CRDs that must be removed
$ oc get crd | grep "gateway.networking"

# For example, here are all the standard CRDs plus one experimental CRD from OpenShift 4.18:
gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io
gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io 
httproutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io 
referencegrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io

# Use those CRD names to delete them, e.g. for the CRDs in the previous example:
$ oc delete crd gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io
$ oc delete crd gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io 
$ oc delete crd httproutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io 
$ oc delete crd referencegrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io

> $ oc delete crd gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io

Reviewer 3: not allowed to delete the CRDs in OpenShift 4.19:
```
% oc delete crds referencegrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io
Error from server (Forbidden): customresourcedefinitions.apiextensions.k8s.io "referencegrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io" is forbidden: ValidatingAdmissionPolicy 'openshift-ingress-operator-gatewayapi-crd-admission' with binding 'openshift-ingress-operator-gatewayapi-crd-admission' denied request: Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions are managed by the Ingress Operator and may not be modified
```

> $ oc delete crd gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io

Author: with some tweaks, i think it will fit well here: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/updating_clusters/preparing-to-update-a-cluster#updating-cluster-prepare-past-4-18

> $ oc delete crd gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io

Reviewer 4: > as it currently stands, i have the procedure included in a doc that doesn't exist in the 4.18 doc set anyway, so it will need to be moved to backport

Is it necessary to backport to the 4.18 documentation?  I thought pre-upgrade steps to upgrade from 4.(_n_ - 1) to 4._n_ generally went into the 4._n_ release notes.

> $ oc delete crd gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io

Author: > Is it necessary to backport to the 4.18 documentation? I thought pre-upgrade steps to upgrade from 4.(n - 1) to 4.n generally went into the 4.n release notes.
it largely depends on complexity, we've always had a document that outlines what users should do to ensure a successful update from version to version. i think in this case with it being so close to GA already, a backport probably isn't necessary. but it can be useful for when we want administrators to make big changes as far in advance of updating clusters as possible (hence why the RHEL worker node removal and migration docs got backported)

----

* If you want to edit the Gateway API CRDs, annotate the CRDs so that they use the correct version with the following command:

> +

Author: i went ahead and just removed this editing portion of the procedure

[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc annotate crds referencegrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io gateway.networking.k8s.io/bundle-version=v1.1.1 --overwrite

Reviewer 2: are we still on v1.1.1? I think I saw the latest cluster using v1.2.1

----
+

> Any controller that was previously managing the lifecycle of the Gateway API CRDs will no longer be available. Attempting to force their use in conjunction with the Ingress Operator to manage these CRDs will cause the cluster to enter into a `"Degraded"` state and prevent the upgrade from succeeding.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any controller that was previously managing the lifecycle of the Gateway API CRDs will fail to operate properly. Attempting to force its use in conjunction with the Ingress Operator to manage Gateway API CRDs may prevent the upgrade from succeeding.

```

// Modules included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/configuring_ingress_cluster_traffic/ingress-gateway-api.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-ingress-gateway-api-manage-succession_{context}"]
= Preparing for Gateway API management succession by the Ingress Operator

> Starting In {product-title} 4.19, the Ingress Operator manages the lifecycle of any Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). Upgrading from a version before 4.19 of {product-title} where this management was not present requires you to replace or remove any Gateway API CRDs that already exist in the cluster so that they conform to the specific {product-title} specification required by the Ingress Operator. {product-title} version 4.19 requires Gateway API Standard version 1.2.0 CRDs.

Reviewer 5: In seems to be unnecessarily capitalized: 
```suggestion
Starting in {product-title} 4.19, the Ingress Operator manages the lifecycle of any Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). Upgrading from a version before 4.19 of {product-title} where this management was not present requires you to replace or remove any Gateway API CRDs that already exist in the cluster so that they conform to the specific {product-title} specification required by the Ingress Operator. {product-title} version 4.19 requires Gateway API Standard version 1.2.0 CRDs.
```

> Starting In {product-title} 4.19, the Ingress Operator manages the lifecycle of any Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). Upgrading from a version before 4.19 of {product-title} where this management was not present requires you to replace or remove any Gateway API CRDs that already exist in the cluster so that they conform to the specific {product-title} specification required by the Ingress Operator. {product-title} version 4.19 requires Gateway API Standard version 1.2.0 CRDs.

Reviewer 5: Update is the preferred term per the [term glossary](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/term_glossary.adoc#update):
```suggestion
Starting In {product-title} 4.19, the Ingress Operator manages the lifecycle of any Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). Updating from a version before 4.19 of {product-title} where this management was not present requires you to replace or remove any Gateway API CRDs that already exist in the cluster so that they conform to the specific {product-title} specification required by the Ingress Operator. {product-title} version 4.19 requires Gateway API Standard version 1.2.0 CRDs.
```

[WARNING]
====
Updating or deleting Gateway API resources can result in downtime and loss of service or data. Be sure you understand how this will affect your cluster before performing the steps in this procedure. If necessary, back up any Gateway API objects in YAML format in order to restore it later.
====

.Prerequisites

> . Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).

Reviewer 5: Just a suggestion to reword this prereq to make it more parallel with the others:
```suggestion
. You have installed the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
```

> . Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
> . You have access to an {product-title} account with cluster administrator access.
> . Optional: You have backed up any necessary Gateway API objects.

Reviewer 5: I think prereqs need to be unordered list items:
```suggestion
* Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
* You have access to an {product-title} account with cluster administrator access.
* Optional: You have backed up any necessary Gateway API objects.
```

.Procedure

> . Get a list of all the Gateway API CRDs that you need to remove by running the following command:

Reviewer 5: Suggestion: maybe this step means the same without the "Get a" phrase at the beginning?
```suggestion
. List of all the Gateway API CRDs that you need to remove by running the following command:
```

If you don't feel that it does mean the same, disregard this suggestion

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get crd | grep "gateway.networking"
----
+
.Example output
+

> [source,text]

Reviewer 5: Technically this output is in the terminal, right? Ignore this if not
```suggestion
[source,terminal]
```

----
gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io
gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io
grpcroutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io
httproutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io
referencegrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io
----

. Delete the Gateway API CRDs from the previous step by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc delete crd gatewayclasses.networking.k8s.io && \
oc delete crd gateways.networking.k8s.io && \
oc delete crd grpcroutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io && \
oc delete crd httproutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io && \
oc delete crd referencesgrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io
----

> 

Reviewer 5: You need a + here to keep the indentation and number order correct:
```suggestion
+
```

> Any controller that was previously managing the lifecycle of the Gateway API CRDs will fail to operate properly. Attempting to force its use in conjunction with the Ingress Operator to manage Gateway API CRDs might prevent the cluster upgrade from succeeding.

Reviewer 5: As mentioned before, update is the preferred term:
```suggestion
Any controller that was previously managing the lifecycle of the Gateway API CRDs will fail to operate properly. Attempting to force its use in conjunction with the Ingress Operator to manage Gateway API CRDs might prevent the cluster update from succeeding.
```

Reviewer 5: Also just a thought - is this info worth making more visible via something like a NOTE or IMPORTANT admoniton?

Author: hm yeah, an `IMPORTANT` admonition might be nice here. the paragraph was originally the last in the document, so it wouldn't have gone unnoticed. now that it's sandwiched between other text, making it distinct would be beneficial i agree

> . Get the supported Gateway API CRDs using the following command:

Reviewer 5: Very soft suggestion to rephrase the wording to be more parallel with the other steps:
```suggestion
. Get the supported Gateway API CRDs running the following command:
```

// Modules included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/configuring_ingress_cluster_traffic/ingress-gateway-api.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-ingress-gateway-api-manage-succession_{context}"]
= Preparing for Gateway API management succession by the Ingress Operator

> Starting in {product-title} 4.19, the Ingress Operator manages the lifecycle of any Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). Updating from a version before 4.19 of {product-title} where this management was not present requires you to replace or remove any Gateway API CRDs that already exist in the cluster so that they conform to the specific {product-title} specification required by the Ingress Operator. {product-title} version 4.19 requires Gateway API Standard version 1.2.0 CRDs.

Reviewer 4: "1.2.0" should be "1.2.1".

> Starting in {product-title} 4.19, the Ingress Operator manages the lifecycle of any Gateway API custom resource definitions (CRDs). Updating from a version before 4.19 of {product-title} where this management was not present requires you to replace or remove any Gateway API CRDs that already exist in the cluster so that they conform to the specific {product-title} specification required by the Ingress Operator. {product-title} version 4.19 requires Gateway API Standard version 1.2.0 CRDs.

Reviewer 4: As noted in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/93327#pullrequestreview-2868138981, we should be more explicit that "the Ingress Operator manages the lifecycle of any Gateway API custom resource definitions" includes that the platform will deny anyone (including the cluster-admin) access to create, update, or delete any CRDs with the API groups that belong to Gateway API.

[WARNING]
====

> Updating or deleting Gateway API resources can result in downtime and loss of service or data. Be sure you understand how this will affect your cluster before performing the steps in this procedure. If necessary, back up any Gateway API objects in YAML format in order to restore it later.

Reviewer 4: We have had several discussions about the effects of deleting or updating the CRDs, and I thought we were going to go into more detail:

- Deleting a CRD causes all custom resources that used the CRD to be deleted.  This can cause loss of data!  For example, deleting the gateways CRD also deletes any gateway objects.  
- Updating a CRD causes data in custom resources that used the CRD to be lost, or access to the data to be lost, if the updated CRD removes the field that contained the data.  
- Updating a CRD twice, when the first update removes a field and the second update re-adds the field, can in some cases cause data to disappear after the first update and then re-appear after the second update, if the first update removes the field that contains the data and the second update re-adds that field.  
- If a third-party controller depends on specific versions of CRDs (for example, an early alpha or an experimental version of a CRD), updating the CRD will break the controller.  Similarly, if a third-party controller depends on some Gateway API CRD that OpenShift does not support (for example, TCPRoute, UDPRoute, or TLSRoute), deleting that CRD will break that controller.  (Note that because OpenShift does not support TCPRoute, UDPRoute, or TLSRoute, there is *no way* to use a controller that requires the CRDs on OpenShift 4.19!)

@shaneutt might be able to point out if I missed anything important.

Author: @Miciah if a user wants to update their old CRDs without deleting them, would they just run the final step in this procedure, the `oc apply -f <https link>`, and skip the steps related to finding and deleting old CRDs? if so, i can add more detail right in there about what happens when you try to update old CRDs

more broadly, which is the better practice that we should be emphasizing to customers:
1. updating or editing old CRDs
2. deleting and recreating CRDs

====

.Prerequisites
* You have installed the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
* You have access to an {product-title} account with cluster administrator access.

> * Optional: You have backed up any necessary Gateway API objects.

Reviewer 4: Do we have any documentation on how to back up Kubernetes API objects?  Should we document an actual procedure?  

It might be as simple as an `oc get gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io,gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io,grpcroutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io,httproutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io,referencegrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io -o yaml > gateway-api-objects.yaml` to back up and `oc apply -f gateway-api-objects.yaml` to restore, but it might be a bit more involved.  If we don't define a procedure and test it now, we will need to do so when people start asking us what this prerequisite actually entails.

Author: if there is one, i'm not aware of it cc: @ahardin-rh. there isn't enough time to create a whole new one before we freeze docs for GA, so i'll add the note just underneath the prerequisites

.Procedure

. List all the Gateway API CRDs that you need to remove by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get crd | grep "gateway.networking"
----
+
.Example output
+
[source,terminal]
----
gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io
gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io
grpcroutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io
httproutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io
referencegrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io
----

. Delete the Gateway API CRDs from the previous step by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc delete crd gatewayclasses.networking.k8s.io && \
oc delete crd gateways.networking.k8s.io && \
oc delete crd grpcroutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io && \
oc delete crd httproutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io && \
oc delete crd referencesgrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io
----
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
Any controller that was previously managing the lifecycle of the Gateway API CRDs will fail to operate properly. Attempting to force its use in conjunction with the Ingress Operator to manage Gateway API CRDs might prevent the cluster update from succeeding.
====

. Get the supported Gateway API CRDs by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases/download/v1.2.0/standard-install.yaml

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
$ oc apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases/download/v1.2.1/standard-install.yaml
```
